README.md, before:

# trafikmaktordningen-audiobook
Original data, derived files, scripts and notes related to building Swedish tts from the audiobook.


original_data contains the audiobook and a pdf with the text, from http://planka.nu/2012/06/26/trafikmaktordningen-som-ljudbok/
The license of this material is "copyme": http://www.kopimi.com, equivalent to Creative Commoncs CC0 "No Rights Reserved" license.

tmo contains files derived from the original data.

---------
Extract text
pdftotext original_data/manus_för_inläsning.pdf tmo/tmo_original.txt

Text that was read but not in the original text file was added manually.
This includes chapter headings, that can be used to split the main text into nine parts corresponding to the nine soundfiles.

So all text corrections should be made in this file: tmo/tmo.txt

Run split script: 'perl scripts/splitMasterText.pl'. Output: tmo/txt/tmo_0{1-9}.txt

---------

Corrections
tmo/tmo.txt has been corrected manually in many ways to match spoken audio. Midsentence newlines have been removed, and sentence-final newlines have been added. There should be one sentence on each line.

egrep -n [0-9] tmo/tmo.txt > tmo/numbers.txt, use to find numbers and change them to words. DONE

----------

Split audio and text into sentences.

Using aeneas ( https://github.com/readbeyond/aeneas ) to locate sentence boundaries in the audio files.

Aeneas can be configured to shift boundaries.

TODO: Try to automatically find cases where aeneas splits in midword..

run sentence alignment script: perl scripts/runSentenceAlignment.pl (should not take more than a minute or two). Output: tmo/syncmaps/tmo_0{1-9}_syncmap.{json,html}

Check quality of alignment:
google-chrome tmo/syncmaps/tmo_01_syncmap.html
Listen, correct boundary if needed, save, copy syncmap from ~/Downloads to tmo/syncmaps_tuned

Actually split audio and text files (and also converting mp3 to wav):

first time: mkdir corpus; mkdir corpus/txt; mkdir corpus/wav

python scripts/splitAudioByJson.py

sox gives a lot of warning messages:

~~~
978.120
988.840
Vill du köpa originalutgåvan av boken, kan du göra det på bland annat www.korpen-koloni.se.
corpus/txt/tmo_1099.txt
sox "original_data/Trafikmaktordningen ljudbok/Trafikmaktordningen - Kapitel 9.mp3" corpus/wav/tmo_1099.wav trim 16:18.120000 0:10.720000
sox WARN mp3: MAD lost sync
sox WARN mp3: MAD lost sync
sox WARN mp3: recoverable MAD error
~~~

But the output files seem to be ok.

Output: corpus/txt/tmo_{0001-1099}.txt and corpus/wav/tmo_{0001-1099}.wav

----------------

Find and label English or other sentences that should not be included.

python3 scripts/detectLanguage.py > corpus/detectedLanguages.txt

Look through the file, removing any files that are mislabelled as not Swedish,
and then run

perl scripts/removeWrongLanguageFilesFromCorpus.pl < corpus/detectedLanguages.txt


----------------


Build mary voice

~~~
mkdir mary_build; mkdir mary_build/wav; mkdir mary_build/text
perl scripts/convertWavForMary.pl
cp corpus/txt/* mary_build/text/


(copy importMain.config if you want..)
sh ~/git/marytts/target/marytts-builder-5.2-SNAPSHOT/bin/voiceimport.sh
~~~

First run AllophonesExtractor to check for oov words

perl scripts/checkMaryxmlForWordsNotInLexicon.pl | sort | uniq -c | sort -n


Pitchmarker and MCEPMaker only needs to be run if soundfiles have been changed

EHMMLabeler is slow. When models have been trained they can then be used the next time:
~~~
edit database.config:

EHMMLabeler.prepareAudioFiles false
(only set to false if audio files have not been changed!)
(this is also remarkably slow, 1000 files take about an hour)

EHMMLabeler.doTraining false
EHMMLabeler.startEHMMModelDir /home/harald/git/trafikmaktordningen-audiobook/mary_sv_tmo_ehmm_mod
~~~

It should now only take a minute or two to realign the files.













TODO CORRECTIONS:

egrep [0-9]{4} corpus/txt/*

check for years, they will very often be mislabelled by mary. Compounds like 1900-talet will be especially wrong.
There are 28 of these.

Commit message:

first mary voice. not so good..

README.md, after:

# trafikmaktordningen-audiobook
Original data, derived files, scripts and notes related to building Swedish tts from the audiobook.


original_data contains the audiobook and a pdf with the text, from http://planka.nu/2012/06/26/trafikmaktordningen-som-ljudbok/
The license of this material is "copyme": http://www.kopimi.com, equivalent to Creative Commoncs CC0 "No Rights Reserved" license.

tmo contains files derived from the original data.

---------
Extract text
pdftotext original_data/manus_för_inläsning.pdf tmo/tmo_original.txt

Text that was read but not in the original text file was added manually.
This includes chapter headings, that can be used to split the main text into nine parts corresponding to the nine soundfiles.

So all text corrections should be made in this file: tmo/tmo.txt

Run split script: 'perl scripts/splitMasterText.pl'. Output: tmo/txt/tmo_0{1-9}.txt

---------

Corrections
tmo/tmo.txt has been corrected manually in many ways to match spoken audio. Midsentence newlines have been removed, and sentence-final newlines have been added. There should be one sentence on each line.

egrep -n [0-9] tmo/tmo.txt > tmo/numbers.txt, use to find numbers and change them to words. DONE

----------

Split audio and text into sentences.

Using aeneas ( https://github.com/readbeyond/aeneas ) to locate sentence boundaries in the audio files.

Aeneas can be configured to shift boundaries.

TODO: Try to automatically find cases where aeneas splits in midword..

run sentence alignment script: perl scripts/runSentenceAlignment.pl (should not take more than a minute or two). Output: tmo/syncmaps/tmo_0{1-9}_syncmap.{json,html}

Check quality of alignment:
google-chrome tmo/syncmaps/tmo_01_syncmap.html
Listen, correct boundary if needed, save, copy syncmap from ~/Downloads to tmo/syncmaps_tuned

Actually split audio and text files (and also converting mp3 to wav):

first time: mkdir corpus; mkdir corpus/txt; mkdir corpus/wav

python scripts/splitAudioByJson.py

sox gives a lot of warning messages:

~~~
978.120
988.840
Vill du köpa originalutgåvan av boken, kan du göra det på bland annat www.korpen-koloni.se.
corpus/txt/tmo_1099.txt
sox "original_data/Trafikmaktordningen ljudbok/Trafikmaktordningen - Kapitel 9.mp3" corpus/wav/tmo_1099.wav trim 16:18.120000 0:10.720000
sox WARN mp3: MAD lost sync
sox WARN mp3: MAD lost sync
sox WARN mp3: recoverable MAD error
~~~

But the output files seem to be ok.

Output: corpus/txt/tmo_{0001-1099}.txt and corpus/wav/tmo_{0001-1099}.wav

----------------

Find and label English or other sentences that should not be included.

python3 scripts/detectLanguage.py > corpus/detectedLanguages.txt

Look through the file, removing any files that are mislabelled as not Swedish,
and then run

perl scripts/removeWrongLanguageFilesFromCorpus.pl < corpus/detectedLanguages.txt


----------------


Build mary voice

~~~
mkdir mary_build; mkdir mary_build/wav; mkdir mary_build/text
perl scripts/convertWavForMary.pl
cp corpus/txt/* mary_build/text/


(copy importMain.config if you want..)
sh ~/git/marytts/target/marytts-builder-5.2-SNAPSHOT/bin/voiceimport.sh
~~~

First run AllophonesExtractor to check for oov words

perl scripts/checkMaryxmlForWordsNotInLexicon.pl | sort | uniq -c | sort -n


Pitchmarker and MCEPMaker only needs to be run if soundfiles have been changed

EHMMLabeler is slow. When models have been trained they can then be used the next time:
~~~
edit database.config:

EHMMLabeler.prepareAudioFiles false
(only set to false if audio files have not been changed!)
(this is also remarkably slow, 1000 files take about an hour)

EHMMLabeler.doTraining false
EHMMLabeler.startEHMMModelDir /home/harald/git/trafikmaktordningen-audiobook/mary_sv_tmo_ehmm_mod
~~~

It should now only take a minute or two to realign the files.

TODO: look at how to realign only the changed files!
AND look at the irish aligner. Is it julius?


------------
Finished voice

marytts unitselection and hsmm voices build.
But don't sound very good.
There are problems with sentence split, it still splits in the last of first word very often. Also perhaps pauses not marked in the text cause problems?
Anyway hsmm voice committed.
